Descriptive truth versus prescriptive truth – seeing a pattern and being able to change it are two different things. Take the example of Sartre’s Existentialism and Nietzsche’s own philosophy. 
Sartre states that things are the way they are and that they couldn’t be any different; god is dead, i.e. the idea of any platonic truths and we must adapt to a new doctrine of thought about the world. This might be an intriguing take if he was proposing a New Kind of Science like Stephen Wolfram – a novel calculus of chaos which pays close attention to butterfly effects for example - but he merely denies that there is any consistency to the _world of ideas_ and that because we can’t rely on their predictive power completely, we can rely on the _at all_. 
Nietzsche on the other hand uses the phrase ‘god is dead’ to question the dogmatic morals of the day, and outlines a new doctrine of thought – one aimed at creating a humble philosopher, rid of their own ego, able to engage in a near constant ‘transcendental epoches’ - a term borrowed from the school of phenomenology - but not used by Nietzsche himself – moments of pure thought where one sees things ‘as they are’, and not ‘as they are _to him/her_’. 
There is a key distinction between the two – the former, Sartre’s existentialism, describes fascinating phenomena of consciousness like anguish – a type of existential dread – but nevertheless leads us deeper into the pit. A pit from which we yearn to escape, because it means we can make sense of our existence and purpose. 
Nietzsche though, very wisely, outlines a set of situations in which we can lose out way on the path to transcendental thinking, and gives us a concrete set of examples from which we can extrapolate the core idea of his philosophy – a philosophy whose core idea is a ‘path’ to transcendence – quite reminiscent of the age of enlightenment. Through examples, he gives us a set of tools with which to carve out our new selves. To put this whole dyad into a more structured term: one thing is understanding the high-level correlations of variables and describe the varying state of a system, but it is a whole other thing to be able to ‘nudge’ the system to take up the states we desire.
